---
layout: post
title:  "2x4 Roubo Bench"
date:   2014-02-11 21:52:02
categories: shop tools
---

For a while now, I had found myself using my tablesaw as a work surface more
than I should. I had a couple of old pieces of OSB that I would lay over it so
that if I needed to use the tablesaw, I could just pick up everything I was
working on using the OSB as a tray. But it was still clear that I needed a
dedicated flat surface.

Recently, I had seen a couple of people talk about building a bench. In
particular, [Stumpy Nubs](http://www.stumpynubs.com/2x6-roubo-workbench.html)
and [Jord's Woodshop](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jACdUrQRGjo&list=PLBFh7Sq0DmVqOpX8PGHbnYnA-joe8Nmof)
had both recently done Roubo builds. I had been turning for about a year, but
I hadn't done nearly as much non-turning woodworking. Not to mention that a
bench is big and heavy and practically a piece of furniture.

I don't think that the Roubo is the only kind of bench. Heck, if the great
[Norm Abram](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IJjrB4SvMWg) doesn't need a
traditional Roubo, then why in the world would I? The reasons I ended up going
that route was because I wanted something heavy, and I think the Roubo style
is beautiful. The more time and energy I put into a tool or a jig, the more
likely I am to use it, and I certainly wanted to make sure I used my bench.

When trying something new, I often begin with the anticipation that I'm going
to have to make it a couple of times before it's something with which I'm happy.
With that in mind and because I didn't want to spend too much, I used just
ordinary whitewood studs. At just a couple bucks apiece, it meant I could get
all my lumber for about $50. After I finished, I was reassured when the
[drunken woodworker](https://drunkenwoodworker.com) mentioned that he had dont
the same thing -- I wasn't alone in using a soft wood.



Examples and Inspiration
========================
There were a few people's benched I really looked at before committing to
building my own.

Stumpy Nubs
-----------
Stumpy, as always, took a very pragmatic approach to the bench. The bench dog
holes and the mortise and sliding dovetail were cut before laminating the
boards, making life much easier. I would say my bench is most heavily inspired
by his. Ultimately I didn't buy his plans -- not out of an unwillingness to
support his projects, but out of the desire to piece it together myself.

Jord's Woodshop
---------------
Jord did a [great series](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jACdUrQRGjo&list=PLBFh7Sq0DmVqOpX8PGHbnYnA-joe8Nmof)
of videos on his latest bench build, which was a pleasure to watch. Had I
access to a large-enough jointer and thickness planer, I would likely have used
more of his techniques. More than anything, what I took out of it was
inspiration and encouragement.

Norm Abram
----------
[Norm makes a bench](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IJjrB4SvMWg) that is quite
pragmatic and much less snobby than most Roubo builds. It's definitely
Roubo-inspired, but built out of 2x4's, plywood and hardboard. I
really don't care much for the look of it, but it was nice to hear such a good
woodworker take such a pragmatic approach. It even has a shelf and a tool tray.
I like the hardboard because it makes it easy to freshen up the surface if it
eventually gets too dinged up.

Alex Harris
-----------
Alex has [plans](http://thiswoodwork.com/build-a-cheap-woodworking-workbench)
for a bench not dissimilar from Norm's. It is cheaper and easier than Stumpy's,
but I wanted a real bench and a bit of a challenge. Though, I was definitely
tempted by the ease of the project.

Colin Knecht
------------
[His workbench](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GctmBLeSVvc) is pretty basic
and again in much the same style as Norm. What you must really appreciate about
it though are the unique features. It's got one corner with two boards attached
at exactly 90 degrees to each other to serve as a reference square for glue-ups
and such. He also keeps a power strip (for turning on and off tools in bulk) and
a light -- gotta love it.

Amalgamated Ideas
-----------------
I collected some of the ideas that I'd been playing around with before building
the bench. Many of these are not mine, and I definitely didn't implement most
of them though I will revisit some of them.

- Shelves. A lot of time, I need to put finish on a lot of little pieces, and
    it might be nice to have some drawers that slide in and out so that I have
    a bunch of places to work on pieces and let them dry.
- Different surfaces. I might even go the route of having a thin board that I
    can apply to the top for work that's maybe a little harder on the bench than
    I'd like. For example, some thin hardboard for things dealing with epoxy.
- Alex Harris uses dowels as pins in a lot of places, and that might be a nice
    little aesthetic touch.
- Bolts in the legs. Alex also uses bolts when attaching the legs, which allows
    him to disassemble it if needed. This has occurred to me, but the vote of
    confidence in the idea is nice.
- Melamine. It might be nice to have a melamine surface for (as Alex points
    out) filming against a white background. It would also be nice for cleanup.
- Built-in square. Colin Knecht keeps two boards permanently on the top that
    are at 90 degrees to one another.
- Bench-dog lamp. Colin makes the good point that it's nice to have extra light
    where you're working, and I thought it might be nice to make an adapter for
    those arm lights to fit into the bench dogs.
- Power strip on the side. You know, for tools.
- Same height as table saw. Because it would be nice to be able to use it as an
    outfeed table.
- Glue. One thing to consider is that some designs require considerably more
    glue than others.
- Dovetail endcap. If I'm feeling particularly snazzy, I could put a dovetail on
    the endcaps.
